The Project Gutenberg EBook of French Painting of the 19th Century in the
National Gallery of Art, by Grose Evans (1928-2000)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: French Painting of the 19th Century in the National Gallery of Art

Author: Grose Evans (1928-2000)

Release Date: April 16, 2019 [EBook #59288]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRENCH PAINTING ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






            _Cover illustration (see description on page 42)_:

                       Auguste Renoir (1841-1919)
                      _A Girl with a Watering Can_
                Canvas. 39½ × 28¾ inches.    Dated 1876
                       _Chester Dale Collection_




                            French Painting
                          of the 19th Century
                                 in the
                        National Gallery of Art


                                   by
                              Grose Evans
                    _Curator of Extension Services_


                           Washington, D. C.

                            _Copyright 1959_
                           Publications Fund
                        National Gallery of Art
                           _Washington, D. C.
                             Revised 1967_

                    _Designed, Engraved, and Printed
                   in the United States of America by
                      The Beck Engraving Company_




                     French Painting: 19th Century


The story of French painters during the nineteenth century is an
exciting one, colored by personal rivalries and revolutions in taste. In
the face of an indifferent or jeering public, artists often had to make
great sacrifices to achieve the sincere expression of their ideals.
Firmly established academic painters bitterly opposed all young artists
who tried to create new styles, and the inertia of popular taste lent
such authority to the Academy that artists could only be original at
their own peril.

The academic style grew out of the classical idealism of Jacques-Louis
David (page 13). He rose to fame during the French Revolution (1789-95)
by producing pictures with propaganda content and attained great
prominence as “the painter of the people.” Son of a Paris tradesman,
David had been fortunate enough to study painting in the French Royal
Academy. After four failures and an attempted suicide, he won the _Prix
de Rome_ and in 1774 was able to go to Italy, which was then considered
the fountainhead of art. There, during a ten-year stay, he reacted
violently against the gay, trivial style of painting that French
aristocrats had loved. Idolizing the ancient statues he saw in Rome, he
introduced a powerful Neo-Classical style and, after his return to
France, he reorganized the Academy to sanction only a sober and
“elevating” imitation of classical art. When Napoleon became emperor, in
1804, he appointed David his court painter and commissioned a series of
huge pictures illustrating imperial ceremonies. However, soon after the
Bourbon monarchy was restored, in 1814, David was exiled to Brussels,
where he spent his last years.

David’s style was continued and refined by his pupil J.-A.-Dominique
Ingres (page 15), whose father was a painter at Montauban. Ingres’
apprenticeship with David and eighteen years spent in Italy led Ingres
to paint with precise, sculpturesque draftsmanship and coldly calculated
color. To sustain the classical tradition, his subjects were usually
drawn from mythology and ancient history. After he returned to Paris, in
1824, Ingres’ ideal of perfectionism came to dominate academic art.

Behind it the Academy had the weight of traditionally accepted theory
and the splendid accomplishments of the Old Masters. The theory, growing
from ancient classical concepts of art, seemed infallible and, on such a
theoretical basis, the five hundred years preceding the nineteenth
century had produced an extremely impressive art. Imitation of idealized
figures was the chief aim of the academic painter. By showing nature “as
it ought to be,” the artist served philosophical and ethical ends; he
could educate mankind by painting morally improving illustrations of
heroic deeds. On this premise art had been raised during the Renaissance
from a handicraft to rank with the liberal arts. Academies had arisen to
prove the merits of art, and why should such august institutions be
challenged?

But even in the early years of the century artists revolted against the
academic limitations. Eugène Delacroix (page 17) was the central figure
in the opposing Romantic movement. Son of a prefect of Marseilles,
Delacroix began painting in 1813 as an amateur in a Parisian academic
studio. Soon new sensuous richness of coloring and a feeling of lively
movement entered Delacroix’s pictures to express strong emotions. His
art reveals new psychological penetration; as he said, addressing his
fellow artists, “Anything can be a subject. The real subject is
yourself; it is your impressions, your emotions before nature. You must
search within yourself, not look about you.” Delacroix’s life was
embittered by the jealous rivalry of Ingres, who called him “the apostle
of ugliness” and prevented him from teaching in the Academy, but his
daring use of color was to influence many later painters.

In the Romantic era, nature, which had been neglected as long as the
classical tradition prevailed, was extolled by poets and painted by
outstanding masters. Camille Corot (page 19), son of a Parisian
milliner, became a leading landscapist. Although his teachers were
academicians, admirers of Poussin and Ingres, Corot turned to his own
fresh experiences of nature. As a Romantic, he saw the world about him
passionately. “While imitating conscientiously,” he said, “I never for a
moment lose the emotion which first caught my interest.” At times Corot
painted with the group of artists who worked at Barbizon near the Forest
of Fontainebleau, or sometimes he traveled in Italy, Switzerland,
Holland, and England, but usually he was content to stay with his
parents in Paris or at their summer home in Ville d’Avray. Versatile in
his art, he combined elements of classical composition with romantic
feeling and realistic vision.

Corot’s breadth of taste allowed him to see the importance of paintings
by Daumier, whom he saved from neglect and poverty. Honoré Daumier (page
21), after serving as a bailiff’s clerk and a librarian, was trained as
a lithographer and turned to political and social caricature. In the
Paris journals, his lithographs, lampooning prominent figures, exposing
graft, and making fun of the _bourgeoisie_, were intensely popular.
Politics had been uppermost in French minds after the Revolution and
times were very unsettled. Two civil revolutions in 1830 and 1848 were
followed by invasion during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. During this
time the government swerved precariously from monarchy to republic, to
empire, and back to republic. The turbulence of these years together
with daily human follies was the material of Daumier’s striking
cartoons. His paintings, largely made for personal satisfaction, dwelt
on the hardships of life in the growing industrial city or, in a lighter
vein, on artists, connoisseurs, and circus performers. With his interest
in the life about him, Daumier was drawn from Romanticism to Realism.

Among artists, dissatisfaction was growing ever stronger against the
implausible gods and heroes painted by academicians and also against the
escapist tendency of the Romantics, who loved to paint exotic scenes,
removed from ordinary experience. The increasing materialism and
scientific objectivity of the nineteenth century demanded a realistic
style. The role of leader in the Realist school was taken by Gustave
Courbet (page 23). This big, boisterous son of a wealthy farmer in
Ornans came to Paris in 1842. After a few lessons, Courbet taught
himself to paint, chiefly by copying in the Louvre galleries. His large,
coarsely executed pictures of common people shocked most of his
contemporaries. When his work was refused at the International
Exhibition of 1855, he opened his own pavilion, boldly titling it “_Le
Pavillon du Réalisme_.” Among his best-known sayings are, “Painting
should consist only in the depiction of things visible and tangible to
the artist,” and, “Show me an angel, and _then_ I’ll paint it.” His
outspoken nature led him to embroil himself in politics after the
Franco-Prussian War. Finally, to escape imprisonment he fled to
Switzerland, where he spent his last years in exile.

Both Daumier’s and Courbet’s realism depended upon their acceptance of
everyday subjects as worthy of being painted. But realism could be
manifest, too, in meticulous attention to details. Henri Fantin-Latour
(page 25), a friend of our American painter Whistler, exhibits this
exacting realism in portraits and still-life pictures. Strongly
influenced by the early developments in photography, he produced works
which, because they were pleasant and unassuming, were often shown at
the annual _Salon_ beside the conservative paintings of approved
academicians. In 1863, however, he found himself with the young “rebels”
who were allowed to exhibit only at the _Salon des Refusés_, and he
began then to associate with the more advanced artists.

Édouard Manet (page 27) was probably more influential as a realist than
even Courbet. His father, a Paris magistrate, offered him a choice
between studying law and joining the merchant marine. After a try at the
latter, in 1857 he was allowed to take up painting. Ironically he was
warned by his academic teacher that unless he gave up his common
subjects, he “would be only the Daumier of painting.” His boldly
painted, unorthodox canvases stirred great controversy, were defended by
Emile Zola, the realistic novelist, and brought new courage to other
artists who sought to escape from academic dullness.

Manet associated with a number of young artists who became known as
Impressionists after a group exhibition in 1874. One of them, Claude
Monet (page 29), displayed a picture called _Impression, Sunrise_, and a
newspaper critic, vastly amused at its sketchy style and at the similar
sketchiness of the other pictures in the exhibit, jeered that these
artists were not painters at all, but “impressionists.” The name stuck
to the group because it so aptly characterized their intentions. Their
aim was to catch a fresh impression of nature in their pictures. Monet
was the leading figure in Impressionism, which developed in the 1870’s
and ’80’s. Son of a grocer in Le Havre, he was doing clever caricatures
at the age of fifteen. He began to paint landscapes with a fellow
artist, Boudin, who taught him to be aware of special effects of outdoor
lighting. Going to Paris in 1863, he attended academic classes but
usually stayed only long enough to answer roll call. Then he would be
off to the city’s outskirts to paint nature instead of ancient heroes.
Often he lured others with him, and Impressionism was born in the
friendly competition of Monet, Renoir, Bazille, and Sisley. Soon they
were joined by others, among them Camille Pissarro and Berthe Morisot.
For many years they sought understanding for their works. Monet, who
alone pursued Impressionism to its ultimate possibilities by painting
vivid sensations of light, suffered abject poverty. Only in his last
years was his art recognized and internationally imitated.

Few of the other Impressionists analyzed light as Monet did; they
contented themselves with sketchy brush strokes which seemed to dissolve
their forms in light. Berthe Morisot (page 31), for example, followed
Manet rather than Monet. After six years of study with Corot, she met
Manet while they were both copying pictures in the Louvre. A strong
friendship developed between Manet and the Morisot family. Berthe became
his pupil and soon afterward married his brother. Her crisp, delicate
brushwork is a feminine version of Manet’s bold style.

Auguste Renoir (cover illustration and page 42), whose glowing colors
rivaled Monet’s, was among the first to outgrow Impressionism. This son
of a Limoges tailor was earning his living at thirteen in Paris by
painting flowers on china. He saved enough money to attend an academy
and met Monet, with whom he often painted along the banks of the Seine.
But by about 1883 he found he “had wrung Impressionism dry.” He
regretted the loss of form, composition, and human values in the
shimmering Impressionist pictures. Setting himself again to paint forms
solidly in space, he nevertheless retained the brilliant colors of
Impressionism.

Sometimes exhibiting with the Impressionists, Edgar Degas (page 33) was
strongly influenced by their coloring and used it in realistic scenes of
Paris life, the race track, and the opera ballet. Degas, son of a
wealthy banker, received a thorough classical education and learned
painting from a pupil of Ingres. In his compositions, he preserved a
classical sense of order which was quite foreign to Impressionist aims.
As he said, “No art was ever less spontaneous than mine. What I
accomplish is the result of reflection upon and study of the old
masters....” Yet he reshaped conventional ideas of composition by
drawing his subjects from life and refining his outlines after the
example of Japanese prints. These Oriental colored woodcuts, which also
influenced Manet, Whistler, and many others, came to Paris first as
wrapping in boxes of china; they were discovered by painters, who found
inspiration in their simple lines and decorative flat areas of color.

Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (page 35), like Degas, saw his pictures as
both realistic and decorative. As a delicate boy of fourteen he injured
both his legs so that they failed to grow. His father, Count Alphonse de
Toulouse, had no patience with his weakling heir, but his mother
encouraged him to paint. In 1885 he turned his back upon the academic
style and, taking hints from the free brushwork of the Impressionists
and from Japanese designs, Lautrec began to paint his pictures of
Parisian night life, circus performers, and cabaret entertainers. Degas,
at first hostile toward him, eventually declared, “Well, Lautrec, I can
see you are one of our trade.”

Vincent van Gogh (page 37) was a Dutchman who came to Paris in 1886 and
met the Impressionists. He possessed a deep sincerity, but also had a
difficult, flaring temper which alienated many people. After working
unsuccessfully as a picture dealer, a tutor, and a lay preacher, he
turned to art as a means of expressing his passionate emotions. At first
he used dark, somber colors like those of his countryman Rembrandt; then
seeing the Impressionists’ canvases, he adopted their brilliant colors.
But their painting of merely optical impressions could not satisfy his
urge for emotional expression. While he borrowed their bright palette,
he used colors for emotional effects, and in his hands the broken
brushwork became a nervous, intensely expressive agent to record his
inner feelings. His whole remarkable career as an artist fell within the
ten years before 1890, when he shot himself to escape insanity.

His friend Paul Gauguin (page 39) shared similar artistic aims. A
wealthy Parisian stockbroker, Gauguin gave up his business and deserted
his family because he felt compelled to paint. After living for a time
in Brittany, he went to Tahiti and broke entirely with Impressionism. He
formed a style in which his experiences and feelings were symbolized by
intense colors and sweeping outlines. His art, which anticipates
twentieth-century trends, was incomprehensible to his contemporaries,
and he died impoverished in the Marquesas.

Paul Cézanne (page 41), too, is a forerunner of the moderns. Born at
Aix-en-Provence, this banker’s son followed his school friend Zola to
Paris. Although an extremely shy youth he soon married a model and for a
time painted and exhibited with the Impressionists. But, constantly
rebuffed by critics and even scorned by Zola, who failed to see any
promise in his forceful early works, Cézanne withdrew to live in
Provence during the 1880’s and perfected his individual style. His
methods paved the way for the abstract painting of our own day. In his
old age a number of young artists and critics sought him out and he
enjoyed a small degree of recognition within his lifetime. His work,
together with that of Manet, Monet, Degas, Lautrec, van Gogh, and
Gauguin, has become the most popular painting today.




                    Jacques-Louis David (1748-1825)
                        _Napoleon in His Study_
                      _Samuel H. Kress Collection_


Remarkably free from the allegorical pomposity of most official
portraits, this picture presents Napoleon I with reserved dignity. The
emperor himself approved it and, upon its completion in 1812,
complimented David. Dressed in his favorite costume, the uniform of the
_chasseur de la garde_ with a general’s epaulettes, Napoleon wears the
Legion of Honor and the Order of the Iron Cross, which commemorates his
earlier coronation as king of Italy. He seems to have just risen from
his desk, on which lies the _Code Napoléon_, the codification of French
law which he promulgated.

David’s style is at its best in portraiture. Combining realism with a
classicist’s respect for human dignity, he shows Napoleon in a
characteristic pose but with an air of grandeur. David’s assured touch
gives authority to the work by its incisive, strong handling of details.
The composition is severely rectilinear; framing the figure, vertical
lines descend through the pilaster and table leg at the left and, again,
from the clock through Napoleon’s arm and the leg of the chair. Against
these, horizontal lines, marked by the book shelves, wall molding, and
desk, lend compositional stability. The diagonal lines of the chair are
countered by the diagonal arrangement of the map and book on the floor.
Before this orderly grid of lines Napoleon’s figure appears subtly
animated.

         [Illustration: Canvas. 80¼ × 49¼ inches    Dated 1812]




               Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres (1780-1867)
                          _Madame Moitessier_
                      _Samuel H. Kress Collection_


“Never has beauty more regal, more splendid, more superb, and of a type
more Junoesque yielded its proud contours to the sensitive drawing of an
artist.” So the poet Théophile Gautier described Ingres’ first portrait
of Madame Moitessier. But Ingres destroyed it because the lady’s
daughter, who was included, would not stand still for him. He produced
this second picture in 1851, after six months of careful work. It
perfectly embodies both his exacting perfectionism and French elegance
during the Second Republic.

Ingres was seventy-one years old when he painted this. Evidently he
admired Madame Moitessier, for she was one of the very few people he
consented to paint in his latter years. He dreaded the arduous demands
he imposed upon himself when doing a portrait. “Art is never nearer
perfection,” he said, “than when it resembles nature so closely that it
might be mistaken for nature itself.” Yet for Ingres, nature had to be
refined through the classical tradition of art, and he sought to cast
Madame Moitessier in the form of an ideal figure by Raphael. Despite
astonishing realism in the hair with its flowers, in the lace and the
jewelry, our eyes move over graceful Raphaelesque curving lines, which
dominate the face and figure. By such means Ingres strove to unite the
real and the ideal.

         [Illustration: Canvas. 57¾ × 39½ inches    Dated 1851]




                      Eugène Delacroix (1798-1863)
                  _Columbus and His Son at La Rábida_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


In 1491 Columbus, despairing of Spanish support for his voyage of
exploration, was on his way to seek aid in France when he and his son
Diego stopped at the monastery of La Rábida, near Huelva, in southern
Spain. Delacroix shows them resting here after their exhausting journey.
Columbus gazes thoughtfully at a map, while the prior, Juan Perez,
behind him, is about to welcome him. Perez, who had been Queen
Isabella’s confessor, was able to arrange a royal interview for Columbus
so that ships and men were secured for the adventure.

Delacroix painted this in 1838, after a trip through Spain. Evidently
the air of quiet mystery in a Spanish monastery caught his fancy, and he
recreates it here. Unlike the Neo-Classicists, the Romantic Delacroix
does not attempt to define his subjects exactly. In his painting, vague,
suggestive forms are used to stimulate the imagination. His composition
is not a linear design; it is spatial; and our interest is drawn into
the space of this room to discover the whispered confidences of the
monks, the mystery of dark corridors, and the kind reception of the
weary travelers. Delacroix sought a “silent power which speaks alone to
the eyes and gains and conquers all the faculties of the spirit.”

         [Illustration: Canvas. 35⅝ × 46⅝ inches    Dated 1838]




                Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot (1796-1875)
                            _Ville d’Avray_
                   _Gift of Count Cecil Pecci-Blunt_


With clean, luminous colors Corot has shown a serene view near his
summer home, at Ville d’Avray. His father had bought a house in this
small village a few miles west of Paris, and Corot often returned to it
throughout his long life. Painted when he was in his seventies, this
picture seems to epitomize the development of Corot’s style. The simple
buff and terra-cotta planes, which emphasize the cubic construction of
the distant buildings, recall his early works, especially those painted
in Italy between 1825 and 1828. After 1850 he evolved his most popular
style, with its predominant silver-gray hues. Gentle, diffuse outdoor
light gives harmony in these pictures to misty greens and watery blues,
and the trees take on a feathery softness. A few touches of reddish hue
complement the cool colors. All of these qualities are apparent in this
late picture.

Corot conceived his paintings broadly in form and value. “I am never in
a hurry to determine details,” he said; “the masses and general
character of a picture concern me above all.” He also sought to preserve
his emotions about nature: “What we feel is indeed real. Before a
subject, we are moved by a certain elegant grace. Never lose sight of
that in looking for exactness and detail.” The mood he suggests is a
romantic reverie upon the subtle colors and serenity of nature.

    [Illustration: Canvas. 19⅜ × 25⅝ inches    Painted c. 1867-1870]




                       Honoré Daumier (1808-1879)
                       _Advice to a Young Artist_
                       _Gift of Duncan Phillips_


Daumier’s broad planes of deep, vibrant color and his roughly applied
highlights struck most of his contemporaries as preposterously crude.
His paintings were astonishingly daring for an era which looked for
meretricious fidelity to nature in its pictures. Few could grasp the
significance of his simple, massive forms or understand how his profound
human sympathy made these forms expressive symbols of emotion. In this
picture a mood, sympathetic and quiet, is established between the young
man and his master as they discuss a sketch selected from the big
portfolio.

For the eye sensitive to color and value, there is a remarkable
satisfaction in Daumier’s choice of hues. How deftly he contrasts the
cool, shadowed paper in the old man’s hands with the warm white of the
sheets below, yet how nicely distinguished the grayish paper is from the
gray smock of the young man! These cool hues reappear, echoed in the
background, to climax in the blue portfolio which rests against the red
couch. The starkly simple, brown-clad old man stands out against the
cool colors about him. On his face a few details, boldly indicated in
dark lines and planes of light, strengthen the picture’s emotional
content. Such a composition has qualities analogous to the majestic
movements of a symphony.

[Illustration: Canvas. 16⅛ × 12⅞ inches    Painted probably after 1860]




                      Gustave Courbet (1819-1877)
                         _La Grotte de la Loue_
                     _Gift of Charles L. Lindemann_


Below a three-hundred-foot perpendicular cliff in the Jura mountains,
the Loue River issues in cascades from a cavernous grotto and flows
through Courbet’s native town, Ornans, to join the Doubs and ultimately
swell the Saône. Courbet, who loved his native scenery, does not choose
to paint the picturesque aspects of this fine scene. Instead he looks
with new intensity at nature and places his unprecedented, forthright
vision almost brutally on canvas. Having little patience with
refinements of draftsmanship, he seems to have used the thick body of
his generously applied paint to counterfeit reality in his picture.
While light and shade are present, Courbet is unconventional in his
modeling of the great rocks. The eye is often uncertain of the surfaces
of these rocks; their directions in space are ill-defined and one form
is not connected with another. But viewing the work broadly, we are
conscious of the painter’s power. How solidly the man spearing a fish
stands before the opening of the spacious cavern and how substantially
the huge masses of rock swell forward from the darkness! With his
powerful, unorthodox style, Courbet broke radically with traditional
modes of painting “to transcribe,” as he said, “the customs, ideas, the
appearances,” of his time, “in a word, to create a living art.”

      [Illustration: Canvas. 38¾ × 51⅜ inches    Painted c. 1865]




                    Henri Fantin-Latour (1836-1904)
                              _Still Life_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


A careful rendering of objects selected for their varied colors, shapes,
and textures and neatly arranged on a table top is a perfect vehicle for
the display of Fantin-Latour’s technical facility. A companion of
artists with such diverse tastes as Ingres, Delacroix, Corot, Courbet,
and Whistler, he created a delicate art which appealed to all. The
objects in this still life have been skillfully placed on the table to
establish a self-contained pictorial composition. The book is turned at
an angle to lead the eye back towards the vase of flowers, which forms a
climax for the picture. The bald shape of the book is artfully
interrupted by the silhouette of the dainty cup; and the tray,
overlapping the table edge, also relieves the monotony of too straight a
line. For the same reason the fruits overlap the tray and basket.
Further variety is given by the careful distinction of various textures.
Like a Dutch Old Master, Fantin-Latour has included a peeled orange to
let him display his cleverness in showing textural variety, and he has
dwelt lovingly on the petals of the flowers. Such a picture
conservatively retains much of the academic style; it was composed on
the table top before it was ever painted, and it should be distinguished
from the work of Fantin-Latour’s more progressive friends.

         [Illustration: Canvas. 24⅜ × 29½ inches    Dated 1866]




                       Édouard Manet (1832-1883)
                          _Gare Saint-Lazare_
_Gift of Horace Havemeyer in memory of his mother Louisine W. Havemeyer_


As chic as a fashion plate, Manet’s picture shows how he reacted against
the academy and found a fresh style to paint the life of his times. The
fashionable young woman is Victorine Meurend, Manet’s favorite model,
whom he painted in _The Picnic_ and _Olympia_, where his bold treatment
of the nude figure shocked or entertained most of Paris. The little girl
was the daughter of a friend, in whose garden Manet painted the picture.
The child looks through the iron railing, evidently fascinated by a
train that has pulled into the Saint-Lazare station in Paris. Obligingly
the train has left behind it a cloud of white smoke which obliterates
unwanted detail from the background so that Manet can arrange the
figures in a handsome pattern against the regular intervals of the
railing.

Like the Impressionists Manet used light colors and, by suppressing
shadows, he secured the effect of bright, outdoor lighting. While he
satisfies the Realist’s love for an apparently casual composition, with
its figures off-center and “unposed,” actually he has sensitively
composed them according to principles learned from Japanese prints. As
in the Oriental woodcuts, here, too, broad silhouettes of contrasting
colors lend the picture its sparkle, while graceful curving contours in
the figures and costumes form a pleasing design.

            [Illustration: Canvas. 36¾ × 45⅛    Dated 1873]




                        Claude Monet (1840-1926)
                _Rouen Cathedral, West Façade, Sunlight_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


The hot sun of early afternoon blazes down upon the lacy stone façade of
Rouen Cathedral. Painted in 1894, twenty years after the first
Impressionist exhibition, this picture reveals Monet’s ultimate
achievement in capturing sunlight with broken color. The myriad glowing
spots of color almost dissolve the cathedral’s form. Small, separate
touches of paint, prismatic in their brilliance, complement each other
to dazzle the eye and suggest the shimmer of actual light. Monet painted
an extensive series of pictures showing different effects of light
playing across the elaborate Gothic tracery of Rouen Cathedral. He said
that often he could paint on each picture for only two or three minutes
at a time; after that, the light would have changed and, for him, the
subject would become quite different.

Monet created a new kind of pictorial unity. It did not depend upon
lines or patterns, but upon the unity of a single visual sensation, an
impression. He gave up such traditional aims as balancing his
composition or expressing emotions about his subjects. Instead he
painted vivid optical sensations. Through long experience he had
discovered what effects of light might be achieved by juxtaposing
certain bright, pure colors which interplay, one against another, to
simulate the visual experience of light. As Cézanne said, “Monet was
only an eye, but what an eye!”

         [Illustration: Canvas. 39½ × 26 inches    Dated 1894]




                       Berthe Morisot (1841-1895)
                          _In the Dining Room_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


Characteristically feminine in her choice of subject and delicacy of
coloring, Berthe Morisot has painted an interior of the house at
Bougival, near Paris, where she spent her summers in the 1880’s.
Probably it is her housemaid, busy in the dining room, who stands
between the open cupboard and the table. A playful little dog adds a
touch of animation to the domestic scene.

During the middle of her career, Berthe Morisot was strongly influenced
by Impressionism. In this picture particular details of the furniture,
of the girl’s costume, or even of her face, held interest for the
painter only in so far as they reflected light in different ways. Much
as it does in Monet’s art, light seems to fill the scene and blur the
edges of the forms. Yet, as in Manet’s pictures, the colors here have
not the daring brilliance of the spectrum hues Monet used. Berthe
Morisot has sustained a refined color harmony of delicate warm and cool
hues in the blue-grays and creamy highlights. Her composition, too,
shows her allegiance to Manet rather than to Monet; the forms are
broadly seen in silhouette so that light and shadow do not impinge upon
them enough to destroy their character as elements in the design.

        [Illustration: Canvas. 24⅛ × 19¾ inches    Painted 1886]




                        Edgar Degas (1834-1917)
                             _Four Dancers_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


Before a colorful stage set, four ballerinas are awaiting their cue to
perform. Dancers were among Degas’ most frequent subjects. Because the
forms of their flaring skirts and bodices were simple, he could arrange
them easily into handsome patterns and make them colorful by the
artificial richness of stage lighting. He sketched the ballet dancers
frequently during their exhausting hours of rehearsal and again in their
spritely performances at the Paris Opera.

Though Degas shared interests with both Realists and Impressionists, he
cannot be classified simply as either. His art synthesized several
trends; he merged the academic and the progressive styles. Firmly
grounded in the academic manner, he used precise outlines, which were
foreign to the Realist or Impressionist. In this picture, his lines
describe the ballerinas’ heads, arms and costumes and also establish an
intricate design of diagonals moving back into depth. While the extreme
off-center balance of the composition gives a realistic “snap-shot”
view, it also heightens our awareness of the design so that the eye
enjoys the variety of shapes and colors. Though the colors are applied
with Impressionistic freedom, they combine into a vibrant harmony
typical of Degas’ late style. Very fond of this picture, Degas kept it
in his studio until his death.

       [Illustration: Canvas. 59½ × 71 inches    Painted c. 1899]




                 Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1864-1901)
                    _Quadrille at the Moulin Rouge_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


In tones of green and copper Toulouse-Lautrec has captured the tawdry
gaiety of Montmartre’s most colorful night spot in the gay ’nineties.
The Moulin Rouge, despite its name, was never a windmill; it is a dance
hall which uses the sails of a mill for advertising. Lautrec frequented
it because he enjoyed watching the nightly performances of its spirited
dancers. Their specialty, the quadrille, grew out of the high-kicking
cancan; almost as vigorous, it was even more complicated. Dominating the
scene here, Gabrielle, a popular professional dancer, has hoisted her
skirts as she lines up with the others to begin the dance. With telling
outline, Lautrec characterizes her robust physique and hoydenish air.
She is in sharp contrast to the woman facing her, in the foreground,
whom Lautrec has shown as delicately refined.

Admiring Manet, Morisot, and especially Degas, Lautrec produced handsome
compositions similar to theirs. Again, under the influence of Japanese
prints, light and shadow have disappeared, replaced by bold color
patterns and strong lines. But Lautrec was far more concerned with
characterization than were the other painters of his time and, like
Daumier in an earlier generation, he gives a wonderfully vivid picture
of his age.

 [Illustration: Gouache on cardboard. 31½ × 23¾ inches    Painted 1892]




                      Vincent van Gogh (1853-1890)
                              _La Mousmé_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


Loving the delicacy of Japanese art and having read about Japan, van
Gogh named this young girl a “mousmé.” The word was taken from a
romantic novel by Pierre Loti, who used it in describing the charm of
the young Japanese tea-house attendants. Actually this subject was a
peasant of Provence, in southern France. Van Gogh went there in 1888
hoping to capture in its bright sunshine some of the beauty he imagined
in Japan.

With a very personal interpretation of Japanese style, he has shown this
figure in a bold pattern of startling, bright colors. Earlier in Paris
he had learned the color theories which Neo-Impressionists were applying
to painting, and here his green, orange red, and intense blue are used
with the purity that characterizes them in the spectrum. The
Neo-Impressionists juxtaposed very small touches of such pure colors in
order to suggest light even brighter than the Impressionists had
achieved. But van Gogh was disinterested in effects of natural lighting.
In this picture the girl is like a figure in an icon. Set against the
plain, intense green background, she seems to be isolated from
commonplace experience, and we are reminded of van Gogh’s stated aim, “I
wish to paint men and women with that quality of the eternal which used
to be suggested by the halo and which we attempt to give by the pure
radiance and vibration of the colors.”

        [Illustration: Canvas. 28⅞ × 23¾ inches    Painted 1888]




                        Paul Gauguin (1848-1903)
                            _Fatata te Miti_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


_Fatata te Miti_ means simply “by the sea,” but what a curious vision
Gauguin’s imagination has created from this scene of two Tahitian girls
on the beach! The artist has found himself in a disquieting, primeval
world where rich tropical colors and exotic forms of life, both human
and vegetable, engender a haunting air of mystery. Gauguin painted this
in 1892, during his second year in Tahiti. He had fled from Western
civilization for he believed its materialistic culture rejected the
artist as a useful citizen. He turned to the Pacific islands because he
felt the need to become a primitive in both life and art. Only by
returning to the primitive’s simple standards might man rediscover
significant meaning in his life and work.

The almost forgotten religion of the Maori cult stirred Gauguin’s mind
to prodigious creative activity. Lingering superstitions delighted him;
phosphorescent fungi on the trees glowing in the twilight, as he painted
them here, were thought to represent the spirits of long dead ancestors.
In his art he evolved an expressive symbolism. He spoke of “the music of
the picture,” a “magic accord” of the colors and arabesque patterns,
which “addresses itself to the most intimate part of the soul.”

         [Illustration: Canvas. 26¾ × 36 inches    Dated 1892]




                        Paul Cézanne (1839-1906)
                              _Still Life_
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


Against rigid horizontal and vertical lines in the background, Cézanne
has juxtaposed the curves of apples, bottles, and folds of drapery in
turbulent, sweeping lines. He delighted in painting still-life subjects,
for here were things that, unlike people, did not want to move but
remained uncomplainingly motionless during the long hours, even days,
that Cézanne needed for his intensive, exacting studies.

Realizing that Impressionists sacrificed the pictorial structure he
admired in the Old Masters’ works, Cézanne took the formless touches of
the Impressionists’ broken color and made each brush stroke a distinct
“little plane.” In an apple, for example, he realized its form and color
by integrating these small modulating planes of color so that the apple
appears solid, round, and glowing with light. Yet Cézanne was aiming
beyond simply reproducing the appearance of an apple. He strove for a
total form in which every brush stroke in his composition is integrated.
Every touch of paint, like a link in a chain, must contribute to the
consistent unity of the picture. He believed a picture should give a
unified sensation in which “every color-touch must contain air, light,
the object, the plane, the character, the drawing, the style.” By
abstracting nature into the painter’s colored planes, Cézanne paved the
way for the abstract styles of the present century.

       [Illustration: Canvas. 26 × 32⅜ inches    Painted c. 1890]




                       Auguste Renoir (1841-1919)
          _A Girl with a Watering Can_ (_Illustrated on cover_)
                  Canvas. 39½ × 28¾ inches. Dated 1876
                       _Chester Dale Collection_


This picture of a very dressed-up little girl, who has been watering
flowers in her garden, inherits the long tradition of appealing
children’s portraits which have been well loved since the days of Titian
and Van Dyck. Renoir, with his love of the Old Masters, combined this
tradition and his Impressionist style. He created delightful portraits,
which were popular at once and gained wider understanding for the
Impressionists. Their art was still entirely misunderstood in 1876, when
this was painted. They were thought to be incompetent daubers, incapable
of “finishing” a picture properly. But Renoir’s extraordinarily deft
handling of delicate flesh tones, as in the child’s face, and the
radiance of his coloring could silence such criticism.

By nature Renoir was too sympathetic with his fellow man—and too charmed
by the loveliness of women and children—to be content with the strict
limits of Monet’s Impressionism. Merely painting sensations of light in
a landscape did not satisfy the humanist Renoir. Once he showed a friend
a delicately tinted sketch of rose petals and told him it was really a
study for flesh tones. “For me,” he said, “a painting should be a
lovable thing, gay and pretty; yes, pretty. There are enough things to
bore us in life without our making more of them.”




                            Index of Artists


              Illustration pages in _bold-faced italics_.

  _Artist_                                                       _Page_

  Cézanne, Paul                                     10-11, 28, 40, _41_
  Corot, Jean-Baptiste-Camille                     3-4, 8, 18, _19_, 24
  Courbet, Gustave                                    5-6, 22, _23_, 24
  Daumier, Honoré                                  4-5, 6, 20, _21_, 34
  David, Jacques-Louis                                    1-2, 12, _13_
  Degas, Edgar                                    8-9, 11, 32, _33_, 34
  Delacroix, Eugène                                     3, 16, _17_, 24
  Fantin-Latour, Henri                                      6, 24, _25_
  Gauguin, Paul                                        10, 11, 38, _39_
  Gogh, Vincent van                                  9-10, 11, 36, _37_
  Ingres, Jean-Auguste-Dominique                  2, 4, 9, 14, _15_, 24
  Manet, Édouard                        6-7, 8, 9, 11, 26, _27_, 30, 34
  Monet, Claude                               7-8, 11, 28, _29_, 30, 42
  Morisot, Berthe                                    7, 8, 30, _31_, 34
  Renoir, Auguste                                     _cover_, 7, 8, 42
  Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri de                            9, 11, 34, _35_

            [Illustration: National Gallery of Art ★ U.S.A.]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of French Painting of the 19th Century in
the National Gallery of Art, by Grose Evans (1928-2000)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRENCH PAINTING ***

***** This file should be named 59288-0.txt or 59288-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/2/8/59288/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

